[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So you might ask, given
the fact that there are these
problems with drugs, we know
they cause side effects.
We know that they only
treat the symptoms.
We know that people need to take
them for a long period of time.
You might ask, why
aren't doctors looking
at some sort of alternatives?
Well, part of the reason
is that drug companies
are one of the major sources of
further education for doctors.
The speed of medical advance
is increasing all the time,
and there's huge amounts
of data coming out
and new trials, new studies,
new findings, cutting edge
research, and no doctor can
possibly keep up with it,
especially as they're also
being asked to work longer hours
and to do more
paperwork and so on.
So doctors are
massively overworked,
and so they need to
have further education.
But the question then comes-- as
always comes up with everything
to do with medicine and
drugs is, who pays for it?
And the answer is, it's
the drug companies.
So the doctors go off
regularly to training sessions,
and it's part of their
contract-- they need to do it.
And they get extra
points for it and so on.
And they go to sessions where
they told about the new drug,
the new treatment for, and
they also are regularly visited
by drug reps, who
are very attractive,
well-trained young men
and women who target--
each doctor has their
own team of reps
that are targeted on them.
And they go, and they will
provide them with the latest
information about the drugs.
And so there is a huge
pressure on doctors to simply--
all the sources of
information, which
are easily accessible to them,
come from the drug companies.
And so not
surprisingly, they have
a view that this is
the appropriate way
to treat almost any disorder.
But the problem
goes a bit deeper
than that, which
is that there is
this tradition that
what we're practicing
is scientific medicine.
And in the medical
schools, they learn
all about the body and
pathways and drug treatments,
and they receive no training
about nutrition or other ways
that you can influence health.
There's also the
fact that the problem
that most people
in the West face
are not really acute
disorders, which
medicine is very
good at dealing with,
but they are chronic disorders.
They're disorders like
depression, diabetes, heart,
arthritis, and so on.
They're things which
don't kill you.
They just make you
rather miserable
and feel rather
terrible and they go
on for a long period of time.
And these are the
kind of conditions
that all of the drugs
are targeted at,
but they're the conditions that
drugs don't treat very well.
So where might
medicine go in order
to incorporate some of
this non-drug approach?
Well, the first thing is
that we are at a stage
now where there's a
major change in what's
happening with medicine, which
is that medicine no longer has
a lock on all the information.
The internet has changed that.
No longer is
medicine a castle up
on a hill, firmly fortified,
powerful, professional people
inside, and the patient
goes up and asks
for some treatment
for their malady
and a prescription
is handed out.
And off they go,
and they have no way
of knowing whether it's
the best thing or not.
Now, of course,
that's all changed.
Internet is changing
everything hugely.
All of the information
that the doctors are using
is available out
there on the web.
So one of the things
that people can do
is to ask questions
of their doctors
about what is the case with the
drug that they're being given.
So they can ask questions
about how many people
need to be treated with a
drug in order for one person
to benefit.
And as we've seen,
in some cases,
up to 200 people may have to
be treated with a drug for one
person to benefit.
And then you might decide
that perhaps this is not
the drug for you.
You might want to ask
questions about what are
the side effects of this drug.
What are the trials that
have been done on it?
Were the trials all run
by the drug companies,
or where there some independent
trials of this drug?
We know, for example, that the
trials run by drug companies
are four times more
likely to come up
with a positive
finding than ones run
by independent investigators.
You might want to know
whether the drug has recently
been put out on the market,
because the mechanisms
for picking up on problems
with drugs are not very good.
And so there are likely to
be all sorts of side effects,
which will emerge gradually.
And you might decide
you don't want
to be a person who's taking
part in this big experiment.
Are they the best way to treat
everything from the start?
And the answer would seem
very clearly to be not.
And so for a lot of
the chronic conditions,
it seems to make a lot
of sense to start off
by doing what you can
with non-drug approaches,
firstly because they're
very unlikely to have
the same range of side effects.
And secondly, because
in a number of cases,
it looks as though they
would have a better
chance of tackling
the underlying problem
rather than simply
dealing with the symptoms.
The underlying approach of the
non-drug treatment is to say,
let's look at what's going
on in the entire system.
And this idea,
it's been rather--
and the term "holism"
or "holistic"
has been rather
debased, and it's
associated with hippies
and sandals and incense
and a whole range of rather
silly woolly vague things.
But there's nothing woolly
or vague about it at all.
We now know that there's a lot
of very good and interesting
studies showing the direct
way that psychological states
affect your physical
functioning.
And physical functioning affects
your psychological states.
And in any sensible
system of medicine,
the two would be brought
to bear on the way
that people are treated.
I still find it very
difficult to understand
why this fantastically
simple and very obvious
message is resisted so fiercely.
And I'm now in a
position where I
think that it will do a large
number of people a lot of--
it will help a lot of people
to lead rather better lives
and more fulfilled
lives if they can
make use of this medicine,
which is out there,
but which just isn't
made available to them
in the same way that drugs are.
The reason I got involved in
this whole area to begin with
was simply as a journalist.
I came across what seemed to me
to be an extraordinary story.
The fact that here
was this single man
talking about dangers with a
drug which were being ignored,
and he was subsequently
vindicated.
And then I've came
across similar stories
where the same pattern
emerged, and it was obvious
that there was something
wrong in the way
that drug-based
medicine was being run.
I don't think this
was necessarily
to do with the fault
of the drug companies.
It's the fault of the way
the whole thing is regulated.
And the more I
looked into it, it
was very clear that there
was another way of treating
a lot of chronic
disorders, which
made an awful lot of sense,
which didn't seem to have
a lot of the problems that
were involved with drugs,
and which had really quite a
lot of evidence to support it.
And I couldn't really--
I still can't really
understand why
something that is so simple--
it's very obvious
that if you get
people to eat rather better, if
you get them to breathe better,
if you get them
to take exercise,
if you get them to change
the way that they live,
and if you treat
specific areas that
are a problem with food or with
products which our bodies are
designed to cope
with-- our bodies
are designed to run on
particular sorts of lipids,
on vitamins, on minerals,
and so on, they're
not going to have
anything like the effects
that drugs will have.
So if you want to
promote health,
that which seems
to me so obvious,
That's where you start.
[MUSIC PLAYING]